This “macros_metadata” file was most recently updated on 2025-10-20 by Marney Pratt


-------------------
GENERAL INFORMATION
-------------------


1. Title of Dataset 

Mill River Macroinvertebrate Data for 2019-2024


2. Author Information


  Principal Investigator Contact Information
        Name: Marney Pratt
           Institution: Smith College
           Address: 44 College Ln, Northampton, MA 01063
           Email: mcpratt@smith.edu



3. Date of data collection (single date, range, approximate date) 
<dates in format YYYY-MM>

2019-05 to 2024-09


4. Geographic location of data collection (where was data collected?): 

Mill River in Northampton, MA  USA
GPS coordinates given below



5. Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the data:

Smith College Facilities Management funded summary salary for Marney Pratt and 
various Summer Undergradate Research Fellowships awarded to students

The Horner Fund also funded Summer Undergradate Research Fellowships to several 
students 

The Smith College Department of Biological Sciences funded some of the materials 
and supplies in addition to Smith College Facilities Management

--------------------------
SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION
-------------------------- 


1. Licenses/restrictions placed on the data:
No restrictions other than proper citation/attribution


2. Recommended citation for this metadata text file:

Pratt, MC.  2024.  Mill River macroinvertebrate data metadata for 2019-2024.  
Smith College, Northampton, MA.

3. Recommended citation for the data:

Pratt, MC.  2024.  Mill River macroinvertebrate data for 2019-2024.  
Smith College, Northampton, MA.



---------------------
DATA & FILE OVERVIEW
---------------------


1. File List
   A. Filename: macro.csv       
      Short description:        

Each row shows the data from one type of organism found from a site on the same 
day.  The data contains all the aquatic invertebrates found for the 2018-2024 
sampling for the upstream and downstream riffles in the Mill River.  



--------------------------
METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION
--------------------------


1. Description of methods used for collection/generation of data: 

Methods: Investigators sampled 5 microhabitats in each site on each date.  

One or Two 50 cm x 50 cm quadrats were sampled within each microhabitat.

Aquatic macroinvertebrates were sampled from riffle habitats (areas with a rocky 
bottom, shallow depth, rippled water surface, and relatively fast water flow) by 
kick-sampling using D-nets (LaMotte D-net, 0.3m base opening & 500 micron mesh) 
in 2018-2022 or kick-nets (Wildco Large Tapered Kick Net - Mesh: 500 um Nitex; 
Handle: 2-piece, 1524 mm (60”); 32 mm (1-1/4”) dia.; 
Frame: 335 x 508 mm (13 x 20”); Shroud: Bottom only; Cod End: Open, 3-1/2")
Nets were placed downstream of the area sampled with the opening facing upstream.  
A quadrat was placed in front of the net, the area sampled was 
0.25 meters squared (quadrat size 0.5 m x 0.5m).  


Larger rocks were picked up and any organisms found on the rocks were picked off 
and placed in a tub of river water.
Once all larger rocks were cleaned off and placed outside of the quadrat, the 
substratum was disturbed by shuffling and kicking an investigator's boots on the 
bottom of the river for 30 seconds to 1 minute making sure that the net caught 
anything disturbed by the kicking. 
The contents of the net were rinsed into the tub of water.  
This process was repeated 5-11 times within a location (location = Upstream or 
Downstream) on the same date, and all samples from a location were either joined 
into one composite sample (Fall 2018) or kept separate by microhabitat (2019 on).  


In each location (upstream and downstream of Paradise Pond) we sampled in
five microhabitats.  We usually sampled 1-2 quadrats in each microhabitat in a 
location on a particular day.  

After collecting in the field, samples were taken back to the lab and live 
sorted into categories (mostly at the order or family level) first or if there 
wasn't time for live sorting then the whole sample was preserved in 
70% ethyl alcohol.  Later, each organism was identified to the lowest level 
possible (down to genus for most things, species for some, and higher taxonomic 
levels for some difficult to identify organisms such as worms and midges.

Note that because of heavy rains in Fall 2018, sampling was very difficult.  
The 3rd downstream sample did not sample the sponge microhabitat (DSP) so there 
were only 4 microhbatitats sampled for that day. The total area sampled on each
day was also variable. An upstream sample date was also cancelled in Fall 2021 
because of heavy rains and dangerous conditions.



2. Describe any quality-assurance procedures performed on the data:
Whenever possible, identifications were checked by Marney Pratt to ensure 
consistency.  Data files were checked by Marney Pratt for errors in entry.

3. People involved with sample collection, processing, analysis and/or submission:

Investigators included:
Marney Pratt
Denise Lello
Julie Dubriel
Smith College students and various volunteers


-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: macros.csv
-----------------------------------------


1. Variable List

date: sampling date in yyyy-mm-dd format 
	dates are all given in year-month-day (yyyy-mm-dd) format in the .csv file 
	(note Excel will sometimes switch it to mm/dd/yyyy)

year: sampling year

season: sampling season (Summer or Fall)
  Summer in this case is usually the first two weeks of June (which means this 
  is very early summer)
  Fall is when the labs were able to be scheduled in various Bio 131 lab sections. 
  This was usually in the last two weeks of September, but often stretched into 
  early October as well.

location: location in the river - Upstream or Downstream of Paradise Pond
	Coordinates estimated with Google Earth.
	https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/112FTHi84gQDcd_78vneF7nzcgPe0D2qoUNOyF4ZxU1M/edit?usp=sharing

	Upstream = This site is located in the Mill River upstream of the Paradise 
	Pond impoundment.  The trail used to get to the river is 	Just off of 
	Federal St in Northampton, MA.  The coordinates for the center of the area of 
	the river sampled that is: 
		UR "downstream of the bend" 42degrees19'09"N  72degrees39'17"W  226m in elevation 
		UR "upstream of the bend"   42degrees19'17"N  72degrees39'12"W  226m in elevation
		Note that the "bend"" is the bend in the river where there is a high 
		retaining wall on one side and the water runs fast and deep

	Downstream = This site is located just downstream of the Paradise Pond Dam and 
	Lamont Bridge in the Mill River.  
	The center of the area of the river sampled in is around:  
	42degrees18'53"N  72degrees38'27"W  150m in elevation
	
	Both sites were fast flowing, relatively shallow, riffles with mostly rocky 
	substrate mixed with more or less sand
	The upstream site is fairly sandy "downstream of the bend" but we tried to 
	sample in the rockier areas

sampleID: unique identification code for each sample.
	example: 01URSU18.UM - first two numbers are the sample number, 
	the next two letters are for the site (UR = upstream riffle, DR = downstream riffle), 
	the next two letters are for the season (SU = summer, FA = Fall), 
	and the last two numbers are for the year (18 = 2018, 19 = 2019).  
	The letters after the period indicate the microhabitat or NA if the 
	microhabitat is unknown

	
	See the map of each habitat for locations including the microhabitats within 
	the sampling area where samples were taken. 		
	https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/112FTHi84gQDcd_78vneF7nzcgPe0D2qoUNOyF4ZxU1M/edit?usp=sharing

microhabitat: there were 5 microhabitats sampled within each location 
  (upstream or downstream) as follows
	
	DSR - Downstream slow rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the 
	athletic fields), just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is 
	slower and there are some large rocks)
	DSP - Downstream sponge area (in the middle of the river, shallow, fast flow, 
	lots of sponges present)
	DFR - Downstream fast rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the 
	athletic fields), just upstream of some larger rocks where the flow is faster 
	and there are some large rocks)
	DM - Downstream middle (in the middle of the river, moderate flow, just 
	downstream of the sponge area, lots of small and medium sized rocks)
	DSH - Downstream shady (on the far side of the river (closer to the 
	athletic fields), in a very fast flow area and very shaded because right below a 
	tree, further upstream than DFR)

	USR - Upstream slow rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path 
	and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), 
	just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is slower and there are 
	some large rocks)
	UFR - Upstream fast rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path 
	and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), just upstream 
	of some larger rocks where the flow is faster and there are some large rocks)
	UM - Upstream middle (in the middle of the river near some larger rocks, 
	moderate flow, "downstream of the bend", lots of smallsized rocks)
	USH - Upstream shady (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", 
	further from the path we come in on), in a fast flow area and shaded 
	because right below a tree)
	USU - Upstream sunny (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", 
	further from the path we come in on), in a realtively fast flow area 
	just downstream of USH that is sunnier

ScientificName: the scientific name the organism was identified to 
  (this is also used to match to the full taxonomic information in the 
  "master.taxa.csv" file)

stage: life stage of the organism (larva, pupa, or adult)

number: number of organisms of that type for that sample on that day

benthicArea: benthic area in meters squared. Calculated as the area of a 
  0.25 meter squared quadrat times the number of quadrats.

invDens: invertebrate density in number per meter squared. 
  Calculated as the number of a particular organism divided by the 
  benthic area that the organism was sampled in.
  

see the "master.taxa_metadata.txt" file for the additional variables on taxonomy, tolerance, and FFG