This file was originally generated on 2018-08-31 and revised on 2025-10-20 by Marney Pratt


-------------------
GENERAL INFORMATION
-------------------


1. Title of Dataset 

Mill River Water Quality Data for 2019-2025


2. Author Information


  Principal Investigator Contact Information
        Name: Marney Pratt
           Institution: Smith College
           Address: 44 College Ln, Northampton, MA 01063
           Email: mcpratt@smith.edu



3. Date of data collection (single date, range, approximate date) <dates in format YYYY-MM-DD>

2019-05 to 2025-09


4. Geographic location of data collection (where was data collected?): 

Mill River in Northampton, MA  USA



5. Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the data:

Smith College Facilities Management funded summary salary for Marney Pratt and 
various Summer Undergradate Research Fellowships awarded to students

The Horner Fund also funded Summer Undergradate Research Fellowships to students 

The Smith College Department of Biological Sciences funded some of the materials and supplies in 
addition to Smith College Facilities Management

--------------------------
SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION
-------------------------- 


1. Licenses/restrictions placed on the data:
No restrictions other than proper citation/attribution


2. Recommended citation for this metadata text file:

Pratt, MC.  2025.  Mill River water quality data metadata for 2019-2025.  Smith College, Northampton, MA.

7. Recommended citation for the data:

Pratt, MC.  2025.  Mill River water quality data for 2019-2025.  Smith College, Northampton, MA.



---------------------
DATA & FILE OVERVIEW
---------------------


1. File List
   A. Filename: waterQ.csv       
      Short description:
Water quality data were measured for both locations (upstream and downstream riffle) in June & September/October 2019-2025


--------------------------
METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION
--------------------------


1. Description of methods used for collection/generation of data: 

Measurements were taken upstream and downstream of Paradise Pond in Northampton, MA in 5 "microhabitat" locations in each area.  
More details are given below.


2. Methods for processing the data: <describe how the submitted data were generated from the raw or collected data>
See DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION below

3. People involved with sample collection, processing, analysis and/or submission:

Investigators included:
MP - Marney Pratt
DL - Denise Lello
Smith College Bio 131 and SURF students and other volunteers


-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: waterQ.csv
-----------------------------------------

Variable List
    
date: sampling date in yyyy-mm-dd format

year: year in which the sampling took place

season: season in which the sampling took place 
  
    Summer = late May - early June (this is probably more accurately described as late spring or early summer for this location)
    Fall = mid September - early October

location: location in the river - Upstream or Downstream of Paradise Pond in the Mill River, Northampton, MA

	Upstream = Upstream Riffle.  This site is located in the Mill River upstream of the Paradise Pond impoundment.  The trail used to get to the river is 
	Just off of Federal St in Northampton, MA.  There are two areas that we sample in upstream.  The coordinates are for the center of the area of the river sampled that is 
	(the bend is the bend in the river where there is a high retaining wall on one side and the water runs fast and deep): 
		
		(1) "downstream of the bend" 42degrees19'09"N  72degrees39'17"W  226m in elevation
	
		(2) "upstream of the bend" 42degrees19'17"N  72degrees39'12"W  226m in elevation

	Downstream = Downstream Riffle.  This site is located just downstream of the Paradise Pond Dam and Lamont Bridge in the Mill River.  
	The center of the area of the river sampled in is around:  42degrees18'53"N  72degrees38'27"W  150m in elevation
	
	Both sites were fast flowing, relatively shallow, riffles with mostly rocky substrate mixed with more or less sand
	The upstream site is fairly sandy "downstream of the bend" but we tried to sample in the rockier areas

sampleID: unique identification for each sampling day for each microhabitat.  

startTime
	Description: the time a measurement was taken using a 24-hour clock in the Eastern Daylight Timezone
	
dateTime.UTC: the date and time together with the time converted from EDT to UTC

microhabitat: microhabitat within the sampling area where samples were taken.   
	See the map of each habitat for locations.

	DSR - Downstream slow rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is slower and there are some large rocks)
	DSP - Downstream sponge area (in the middle of the river, shallow, fast flow, lots of sponges present)
	DFR - Downstream fast rocky (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), just upstream of some larger rocks where the flow is faster and there are some large rocks)
	DM - Downstream middle (in the middle of the river, moderate flow, just downstream of the sponge area, lots of small and medium sized rocks)
	DSH - Downstream shady (on the far side of the river (closer to the athletic fields), in a very fast flow area and very shaded because right below a tree, further upstream than DFR)

	USR - Upstream slow rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), just downstream of some larger rocks where the flow is slower and there are some large rocks)
	UFR - Upstream fast rocky (on the close side of the river (closer to the path and the side with the retaining wall, "downstream of the bend"), just upstream of some larger rocks where the flow is faster and there are some large rocks)
	UM - Upstream middle (in the middle of the river near some larger rocks, moderate flow, "downstream of the bend", lots of smallsized rocks)
	USH - Upstream shady (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", further from the path we come in on), in a fast flow area and shaded because right below a tree)
	USU - Upstream sunny (on the far side of the river ("upstream of the bend", further from the path we come in on), in a realtively fast flow area just downstream of USH that is sunnier        


quadrat: sample number within a microhabitat on a particular day.  1-3 samples were made in each microhabitat per day

depth: depth of the water in centimeters, measured with a meter stick with millimeter markings

pH: the pH 
	pH was measured using an Oakton pH Testr 50 Waterproof Pocket pH Tester (accuracy: ±0.01 pH)
	which was calibrated ahead of time using buffers made using the Vernier pH capsule set
	Effort was made to wait until the meter stabilized on a reading before the pH was recorded

wTemp: Water temperature was measured in Celcius by different tools depending on year

	2018-2019 we used the Vernier Stainless Steel Temperature Probe (accuracy: ±0.2°C at 0°C, ±0.5°C at 100°C) . 
	https://www.vernier.com/manuals/tmp-bta/
	
	Starting in 2020, we used the Oakton pH Testr 50 Waterproof Pocket pH Tester (accuracy: ±0.2°C) to minimize the number of different tools to bring in the field


	In all cases, the reading taken just below the surface (with the whole metal part of the sensor in the water) and was a 10 second average once the reading seemed to stabilize. 

DO: Dissolved oxygen was measured in milligrams of oxygen per liter by the Vernier Optical Dissolved Oxygen Probe (accurate to ± 0.1 mg/L). 
	https://www.vernier.com/manuals/odo-bta/
	The reading taken just below the surface (with the probe all the way in the water at least up to the temperature sensor) and was a 10 second average. 
	The probe was calibrated using a zero oxygen solution of sodium sulfite and a 100% saturation value determined by placing the probe in the storage cap 
	with distilled water saturating the sponge (so the air was 100% saturated with water)
	Effort was made to make sure that the probe had settled on a reading before it was recorded (it can take a little while for the first reading or two to settle as the temperature 
	adjusts)

light: The photosyntehtically active radiation was measured in photosynthetic photon flux density (PPFD) which corresponds to the micromoles of photons per meter squared per second
	https://www.vernier.com/files/manuals/par-bta.pdf
	The sensor was mounted on a PVC pipe with one section that was bent to be parallel to the bottom of the river.  The sensor faced upstream (with the cord facing downstream)
	and care was taken to not let our shaddows interfere with the sensor.
	The reading taken was a 10 second average. 
	PAR range 0 to 2000 umol m-2 s-1 (in full sun)
	Absolute accuracy ±5% (full scale)
	Repeatability ±1%
	Long-term drift Less than 2% per year
	Cosine response
		 45º ±2%
 		75º ±5%
	Spectral range 410–655 nm
	Resolution 1 umol m-2 s-1
	Operating environment –40 to 70˚ C
		0–100% relative humidity
	Sensor head and cable can be submerged in water to electronics box.
	Stored calibration values
		slope 500 umol m-2 s-1/ V
		intercept 0 

flow: the flow rate of the water in meters per second
	flow rate was measured in meters per second by the Vernier Flow Rate Sensor (without any spacer on the bottom) (accurate to 0.04 m/s, resolution of 0.0012 m/s). https://www.vernier.com/files/manuals/flo-bta.pdf
	Does not measure really low flows well, there were times when the water could be seen to be moving very slowly but the propeller did not spin at all.
	Flow measurement was taken by facing the propeller upstream and taking a 10 second average 
	The flow rate sensor was zeroed before measurements began.

turb: Turbidity was measured in Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) by the Vernier Turbidity Sensor (accurate to ±2 NTU for readings under 25 NTU). https://www.vernier.com/files/manuals/trb-bta.pdf
	Samples of water from each location were taken with a clean turbidity bottle (https://www.vernier.com/products/accessories/trb-bot/)
	Calibration was done using Millipore filtered RO water and the 100 NTU calibration bottle that came with the sensor.  All bottles were tipped upside down three times before a measurement was taken or calibration was performed
	Bottles were wiped clean by a Kim Wipe before the bottle was placed in the sensor.

cond: Conductivity was measured in microsiemens per centimeter (µS/cm) by the Vernier Conductivity Probe (accurate to ±2% of full-scale). https://www.vernier.com/manuals/con-bta/
	The conductivity probe was calibrated with Millipore filtered RO water and conductivity standard solution (low) of 150 µ S/cm. Measurements were made in the low range setting.
	https://www.vernier.com/products/accessories/con-lst/

	Low range: 0 to 200 µS/cm (0 to 100 mg/L TDS) 
	Mid range: 0 to 2000 µS/cm (0 to 1000 mg/L TDS)
	High range: 0 to 20,000 µS/cm (0 to 10,000 mg/L TDS)

nitrate: the concentration of Nitrate (NO3–) in milligrams per liter (mg/L) (=ppm) in the water as measured by the Vernier Nitrate Ion-Selective Electrode (accurate to ±10% of full scale (calibrated 1 to 100 mg/L)). https://www.vernier.com/product/nitrate-ion-selective-electrode/

  The Nitrate Ion-Selective Electrode was calibrate with a low (1 mg/L) and high (100 mg/L) Nitrate standard that were each purchased from Vernier (catalog codes NO3-LST and NO3_HST respectively).


alkalinity: the total alkalinity of a water sample in parts per million of calcium carbonate (ppm of CaCO3)

  In Summer 2022, alkalinity was measured using the Alkalinity Test Kit- Titrator from Lamotte (Order Code  4491-DR-01, https://lamotte.com/products/aquarium-and-fish-farming/individual-test-kits/alkalinity-test-kit-titrator-4491-dr-01). This kit required watching for a color change while adding 4 ppm increments of the reagent. To convert the results to degrees of carbonate hardness (dKH): ppm CaCO3 x 0.056 = dKH CaCO3
  
  Starting in Fall 2022, alkalinity was measured using the Hanna Instruments Freshwater Alkalinity Checker (order code: HI775, https://www.hannainst.com/hi775-alkalinity-freshwater.html). This colorimeter has a resolution of 1 ppm and and accuracy of ±5 ppm or ±5% of reading. The instrument displays the alkalinity concentration in ppm of CaCO3. Alkalinity conversion: 1 ppm CaCO3 = 0.02 meq/L = 0.056 dkH